SPARSE TRAJECTORY REGISTRATION NOTES

Purpose
The script assigns MoCap tracks to a larger pool of dewarped video tracks without
using absolute position or spatial scale during assignment. Only accepted identity
correspondences are used to compare spatial transforms.

Method
1. Sample both systems on the same relative-time grid around a known synchronized
   baseline.
2. Keep video tracks that contain the baseline, meet the coverage threshold, and
   move enough to be informative.
3. Subtract each track's baseline position and normalize its RMS displacement.
4. For large candidate matrices, shortlist video tracks for each MoCap track using
   a fast radial-motion signature.
5. Compute the final pair cost after pair-specific similarity alignment, or optional
   affine alignment.
6. Solve a one-to-one assignment with an explicit no-match option for every MoCap
   track. Untagged video tracks are not forced into matches.
7. Fit strict linear, similarity, and affine maps. Compare them with cross-validation
   that leaves entire matched trajectories out of training.

Population imbalance
- MoCap tracks are the assignment targets; video tracks are candidates. Most video
  tracks may remain unused because only about one third of animals are tagged.
- A MoCap track may also remain unmatched. This avoids forcing a poor video identity
  onto a MoCap track that is absent or unusable in the video window.
- Assignment margins are checked in both directions. The MoCap-to-video competitor
  margin is especially important because a large video pool increases the chance of
  an accidental low cost.
- Above 500000 possible pairs, the default radial shortlist retains 100 video
  candidates per MoCap track before the more expensive pairwise alignment. Increase
  shortlist_size if strong affine distortion may alter the radial ranking.
- The code does not assume that spatially isolated video animals are more likely to
  be tagged. Optional video_candidate_ids can be supplied if a candidate subset was
  selected using independent evidence.

Transform definitions
- linear:    video = M @ mocap, with a free 2 by 2 matrix and no offset.
- similarity: video = s R @ mocap + b, allowing uniform scale, rotation or
  reflection, and translation.
- affine:    video = A @ mocap + b, allowing translation, shear, and unequal axis
  scales.

The saved convention is:
    video_xy = mocap_xy @ matrix.T + offset

Assumptions and uncertainties
- The baseline timestamps are correctly synchronized. The script does not search
  temporal lag; baseline error can cause false assignments.
- A MoCap frame, time, or timestamp column is preferred. If the dataframe contains
  only id, x, and y with a default RangeIndex, row order within each id is treated as
  zero-based sample number. mocap_baseline must use that same convention.
- Track identity is stable inside the window. Identity swaps and fragments can
  produce confident but wrong assignments.
- Motion must be distinctive. Stationary and nearly straight tracks provide little
  identity information. Pairwise affine alignment also requires two-dimensional
  motion.
- Pairwise similarity alignment is the default because it is harder to overfit.
  Strong shear or unequal axis scale can increase the correct match cost. Rerun with
  pair_alignment_model="affine" as a sensitivity check.
- Pairwise affine alignment is more tolerant of the transform being tested, but its
  extra freedom can make unrelated short trajectories look similar.
- The radial shortlist is invariant to translation, rotation, reflection, and
  uniform scale, but not to a general affine transform.
- max_shape_cost and min_assignment_margin are heuristic screening thresholds. Their
  distributions should be inspected on real data, especially with the large video
  candidate pool. Margins are conditional on the shortlist when shortlisting is used.
- Cross-validation is grouped by matched identity, which prevents frame leakage.
  Confidence still depends on the number and spatial coverage of accepted animals,
  not the number of sampled frames.

Interpretation
- Lower shape_cost and larger assignment_margin indicate stronger assignment
  evidence. A match must pass both configured thresholds.
- Compare cv_rmse or cv_nrmse rather than training error. Affine training error will
  usually be lower because the model has more freedom.
- The recommended model uses a one-standard-error rule and prefers fewer parameters
  when held-out performance is indistinguishable.
- A lower affine error supports an origin offset, shear, or unequal axis scaling.
  Poor held-out error for every model may instead reflect wrong identities, lag
  error, tracking noise, or residual dewarping error. It does not by itself prove a
  nonlinear transform.

Minimal Python use
    result = match_and_compare_transforms(
        video_ds,
        mocap_df,
        video_baseline_frame=12000,
        mocap_baseline=30000,
        video_fps=25,
        mocap_fps=100,
        window_seconds=1.0,
    )
    result.save("trajectory_registration_output")

Defaults
- Video variables: centroid_x and centroid_y
- Video coordinates: id and frame
- MoCap columns: id, x, and y

Outputs
- matches.csv: accepted and unmatched MoCap tracks, costs, and margins
- paired_points.csv: accepted point pairs used for spatial fitting
- model_metrics.csv: training and held-out model errors
- transforms.json: fitted matrices and offsets
- run_summary.json: configuration, counts, and the heuristic model recommendation
